ChIP-seq data analysis
======================

A combination of stand-alone tools, Perl scripts, BioPerl toolkit
and R was used to carry out the following steps. Where possible,
GNU Parallel was used to process multiple data sets in parallel.

1. The reads in the fastq files received from the sequencing
contractor were aligned to the S. venezuelae genome (GenBank
accession number CP018074) using the bowtie2 software (version
2.2.9), which resulted in one SAM (.sam) file for each pair of
fastq files (paired-end sequencing).

2. For each sam file, the depth command of samtools (version 1.8)
was used to arrive at the depth of sequencing at each nucleotide
position of the S. venezuelae chromosome.

3. From the sequencing depths at each nucleotide position
determined in 2, a local enrichment was calculated in a moving
window of 30 nucleotides moving in steps of 15 nucleotides as
(the mean depth at each nucleotide position in the 30-nt window)
divided by (the mean depth at each nucleotide position in a
3000-nucleotide window centered around the 30-nucleotide window).
This results in an enrichment ratio value for every 15
nucleotides along the genome. The enrichment ratios thus
calculated were stored in files in the bedgraph format and were
used for viewing in IGB.

4. After ensuring good correlation between the replicates
(Spearman correlation coefficient > 0.85) the mean of the
replicates was calculated and used in further calculations.

5. Enrichment in the control was subtracted from the enrichment
in the WT files.

6. Significance of enrichment was calculated assuming normal
distribution of the control-subtracted enrichment values and rows
ordered from low to high P-values.

7. Association of regions of enrichment with P-values below 1e-4
with genes on the chromosome was done by simply listing genes
left and right of the region. Rows of lower significance with the
same context of genes were removed to leave the most significant
row for each combination of left, right and "within" genes. Also,
genes had to be in the right orientation and within 500
nucleotides of the enriched region for association with the
region.

8. The final list of genes was ultimately checked by visual
inspection of depth in the region in IGB.



References:

Langmead B, Salzberg S. Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2.
Nature Methods. 2012, 9:357-359.

R Core Team (2018). R: A language and environment for statistical
computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.
URL https://www.R-project.org/.

BioPerl(2018). https://bioperl.org/

samtools(2018). https://www.sanger.ac.uk/science/tools/samtools-bcftools-htslib)

Tange Ole (2018). GNU Parallel https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1146014

